# Minutes - 2021-12-16

first meeting!

## Attendance

* Nick Doty (Center for Democracy & Technology)
* Tzviya Siegman (Wiley)
* Robin Berjon (The New York Times)
* hellekin (petites singularitÃ©s)
* Sebastian
* Vittorio
* Tim Simcoe
* PaulF
* FarzanehB


## Agenda

- [ ] Minutes
- [ ] CoC / Ground Rules https://www.w3.org/Consortium/cepc/
- [ ] Charter
- [ ] Next Steps

### Minutes
Minutes are taken in the shared notes.

### CoC / Ground Rules

-> https://www.w3.org/Consortium/cepc/

### Charter

-> https://interop-remedies-cg.github.io/

mnot: overview of the charter draft

outputs might include guides to making standards and the Internet stack understandable to regulators

could be counterproductive if we are hostile to particular companies or products. focus on how we could improve specifications that could improve future abuses of power.

refinements or open comments?

vittorio: identity as a focus area?

email address portability could be another item of work. migrating email data, including contacts and emails.

mnot: importance of the kinds of data actually needed for users to have significance of interoperability.

sebastian lasse: Digital Services Act and Digital Markets Act

mandatory interoperability of messaging services? or social networking including ActivityPub. I would like to sketch out what requirements would be or critiques of mandatory interoperability.

vittorio: quick summary. parliamentary approval of the DMA, but still would need to go through negotiation with member states, after which it would be voted again (six months or so), after which it would be final.

DMA touches interoperability. @@@. requirement on very big platforms allowed to use third parties. new clauses on interoperability on number-independent communications (instant messaging) and social media.

instant messaging, @@@.

social media, EC will work on a specification of how this will be done. in touch with who could be tasked to do this, but depends on the finalization of the act.

DSA, no real interoperability clause despite some suggestions.

sebastian: European parliament adopted DSA, but don't include interop requirements. DSA goal is now to impose stricter mechanisms on removing fake news or disinformation or abusive content. DSA does not include funding for open protocol standardization.

sebastian: DMA has two proposals from the European Commission. coalition by Matrix and smaller messenger services (not including WhatsApp). proposed for mandatory interoperability of messaging services. 

criticism of messaging interop -- not like email or SMS any more but more full social networks. but an opportunity for bridges, like using ActivityPub and ActivityStreams vocabulary.

technical hurdles before mandating interoperability for social networks. but German government also want this, and a level playing field in the market. don't want DMA to fall behind national regulations, so want DMA to include similar requirements on data portability and interoperability of social networks.

last critique: end-to-end encryption should be required which ActivityPub and other specs have not standardized.

hellekin: thanks for making this group happen! appreciate using BBB.

worried about legislation like in the UK, where interoperability could become a requirement for using a private company. we should ask for open standards and free software as a requirement. interoperability without interconnection would be harmful. keep in mind rfc7258 (pervasive monitoring is an attack).

tzviya: group goals may be very lofty, but not sure what we can accomplish unless we start with something small. start with accessibility.

European Accessibility Act. a11y is one thing that W3C has succeeded that is part of legislation. we can document how this is already done, how legislation already incorporates WCAG. and then we can move on and say how we would do this for other topics like privacy.

mnot: +1 for starting small, but we are focused on competition and interoperability for this group.

tzviya: some people say that W3C should never influence policy (for example on privacy), and we should note that it already happens.
mnot: a good discussion to take to the Advisory Committee.

mnot: sometimes interoperability is phrased at the level of products, but might be more useful to think about specific functions. not duplicating an entire proprietary platform

nick: when working on standards we tend to consider what implementers would need. It would help talking about specific features, even if we cluster them together in a topic like social networking. and could enable more interesting designs where features are connected in novel ways, rather than just cloning existing dominant products.

mnot: +1, some of these things may be obvious to technical designers

hellekin: about the balance of power. not every feature is something that a smaller actor is able to do. not every feature may be useful to your users. wouldn't want legislation to require implementing every feature which might benefit the larger companies who can implement more. example of @@@, what large companies believe is necessary to stop terrorist content online -- if you don't respond within an hour, then you're liable. that kind of requirement would have been different if smaller players had been involved. for example, rather than amount of time, talk about liability based on the number of views.

sebastian: only a small number of gatekeepers. topics that may not be clear to regulators: should we give technical expertise to policymakers? can be very successful, as in germany. can W3C do that?
    
mnot: this group can't speak on behalf of w3c; need to be clear about that. still have expertise that could be useful to share. could write a crash course introduction on protocol design. deliverable could include a horizontal design doc for regulators to think about.

tzviya: Advisory Board would also be interested in receiving/reviewing that document.

robin: happy to help with that kind of document, describing horizontal review or the kinds of reviews we do. suspect it would be a document widely read.

mnot: could refer to other documents/authorities but package it up.

robin: point out that standard-setting bodies do have first principles (ethical web principles, priority of constituencies). valuable to just point that out.

no one cares a lot about the exact distinctions between SDOs.

hellekin: could ultimately be an informational rfc.

[ definitely some volunteers to help with this topic ]

farzaneh: excited about this group! Christ Church Call sometimes discusses topics related to infrastructure. need to tell @@ how requirements they come up with could affect the interoperable, secure, etc nature of the Internet. could consult with this group how these CCC commitments could have an impact on interop.

mnot: +1 to collecting all the forms of upcoming potential regulation and where we can have an impact.

Tim Simcoe: economist with a user perspective. encourage the group to think about breaking out specific functions rather than entire product. could be used for merger review: economists need ready guides to evaluate the costs and benefits of a particular remedy. need a statement of when it would be easy or difficult/expensive to make a feature interoperable.  

how do regulators assess the different positions when considering a remedy.

mnot: competition regulators may have different goals -- they want just a competitive market, but we have other goals as well.

tim: regulators would be happy to understand or consider your goals as well. but you can also make it easier for them to achieve their goals.

### next steps

mnot: what work mode? how can we start some momentum?

gathering together different areas of work

work on a horizontal document to help regulators understand. mnot willing to get that started.

robin: if people have proposals, please do! if it's somehow related, bring forward even before another call.

npdoty: should we start gathering tech requirements etc. in particular feature areas?

mnot: maybe we have tight timelines and should get started in areas we know. messaging/chat and social networking.

robin: and maybe we should have direct conversations with people working on those regulations (like FTC/NIST/etc. on ACCESS Act) to try to uncover what areas are likely    

mnot: start gather background material on chat and social networking. wiki page to gather/link/organize info.

github repo/wiki?

hellekin: start on mailing list, and move to something more usable for knowledge-management system

mnot: please share info on DMA/DSA/ACCESS.

EDRi European Digital Rights - Sebastian in touch and can invite.

organize next meeting in mid-January


: 

    
    
    


